# Microbiome-SVD

This code implements the method proposed by the book chapter, "A Bayesian Approach to Restoring the Duality between Principal Components of a Distance Matrix and Operational Taxonomic Units in Microbiome Analyses," to appear in the edited volume, "Statistical Analysis of Microbiome Data" (eds. Datta, S. and Guha, S.), Springer Nature, Switzerland.

Abstract:

For high-dimensional microbiome data, it is important to develop analytical techniques for analyzing the complex relationships between OTUs and sample units. Ecological studies utilize abundance matrix X and phylogenetic information to compute pairwise "distances" between the sample units or observations. Singular value decomposition (SVD) of X is often utilized to identify OTUs that strongly influence the groupings of observations into meaningful clusters. However, since it implicitly relies on XX' as a measure of similarity, the SVD approach may be suboptimal when the appropriate distances are complex stochastic functions of X and of complementary information; examples include the commonly used Unifrac distances.
For arbitrary distance matrices, we formulate an approximate SVD-type decomposition to restore, via the Bayesian paradigm, the duality between orthonormal vectors associated with the distance and orthonormal vectors of the OTUs. Unlike existing SVD-type techniques, our approach can provide inferences beyond point estimates, such as standard errors and credible intervals, and for all functionals of interest such as the contributions of individual OTUs. A cost-effective version of the basic Bayesian procedure is devised to quickly analyze the large number of OTUs with high accuracy. The reliability of the approach is established through simulation studies. Two microbiome datasets are analyzed, where alternative distances such as Gower and Unifrac are found to have lower classification test set errors than distances implicitly assumed by traditional SVD analyses.

